Updated and verified README (#93)
vegastrike/Assets-Masters: README.rst

Assets Masters
==============

> This repository contains the master artwork for the Vega Strike game *Upon the Coldest Sea*.

Reviewer: To keep consistent, we should update this to `the game Vega Strike: Upon the Coldest Sea` as that is the official title.

Reviewer: @SGD1953 thanks confirming this was fixed

- Extension: .texture for **textures** and .image for **images** (pre-DDS naming png, jpg, 
bmp still may be found in data)
- Quality: RQ or CQ
- Mipmaps: required for **textures**, not required for 2d **images**
- Tileable (seamless): for some image types

Image ratio
***********

The **image ratio** horizontal:vertical will depend on the image type. The recommendations 
are always assuming that pixel ratio is 1:1. This means, no matter what image ratio is used, 
a circle must show as a circle when viewing the image in an image viewer.

For example, it's 2:1 for planet textures, 1:1 for cargo images, planet hud images and 
space background faces, 4:1 for current shield and armor face images.

Square things make sense to be 1:1, however other things can be pretty arbitrary, usually 
you need to round to obtain the closest power of two, for example 400x300 -> 512x256.

Image dimensions
****************

The vertical and horizontal size of the image should be a **power of two** (POT). Really, 
non-POT (non-power-of-two) textures are troublesome, time and memory consuming, since
otherwise they need to be scaled when loaded and it's just best to skip that step. It'd 

> be ideal if they were also power of two in *Asserts-Masters*, but that's not required, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be ideal if they were also power of two in *Assets-Masters*, but that's not required, 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

> but the exports to data4.x (Assets-Production?) should always be some power of 2.

Reviewer 2: Yes, Assets-Production, I'm pretty sure

Author: It might be that this references a certain version of the former `data` directory, will update.

Reviewer: @SGD1953 we did away with the Data directory linkage at the repository level. The Assets are now separately installed. So we can technically do away with the references to specific data directories like that; it's probably better to reference the data directory Vega Strike Engine command-line option instead.

Reviewer 2: Cool -- fixed

Just use POT. Love the POT. The POT is the mother, the POT is the father. Trust the POT.

That leaves few options for the horizontal or vertical resolution:

- 64 px
- 128 px
- 256 px
- 512 px
- 1024 px
- 2048 px
- 4096 px

1x1 images are allowed, for example if using a texture with a single color, or a 
transparent image.

The size recommendation will depend on the image type. Please refer to the specific 
image type requirements in the art-related development section.

Keeping original high resolution image (e.g. 2048 or 4096 px) versions in stock 
(and in this repository) helps maintaining quality and scalability as game development
progresses or typical screen resolutions rise in the future with better hardware 
available to the players. Also, keeping original 3D-models in stock provides for 
unplanned future changes.

Some images in here are more than 20 years old and in resolutions greater than 2048 px, 
this means we can still use them today. **Kudos to the original artists for their foresight 
and dedication to quality.**

Image Compression Codec
***********************

The graphics format for the game is **dds** format, (though the file extension can 

> be either **png** (preferred as it is lossless), **jpg**, or **bmp**).

Reviewer 2: Taken out of context, this makes it sounds like using png, jpg or bmp files for new textures to be included in Assets-Production is acceptable. However, information elsewhere on the page makes it clear that these extensions are acceptable only for existing artwork that has fixed filenames, or for original files, not for what gets included in Assets-Production for new artwork. This sentence should probably be changed to reflect that.

Author: I guess the question is what's desired? We could say that new submissions should be `PNG` but the repo still contains other formats for historical reasons, to me that would make most sense.

Reviewer: @SGD1953 that would be correct - we prefer PNG format; other formats should be _upgraded_ to PNG.

We should probably use MNG for when we need multiple images inside the file -  think animated GIFs and Icon files; though I can't confirm that the engine will actually use MNG at this point.

Reviewer 2: I think the wording here is backwards. The file **extension** is always supposed to be `.dds` for new artwork. The **format** of the image(s) inside can be PNG, and that is probably what is preferred.

Right?

Reviewer: @stephengtuggy correct

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

The minimum texture that is DDS compressed is something like 64x for it to be 
beneficial as far as speed and size are concerned. Anything smaller than that may 
be better off being png, as it won't be compressed anyway.

Allowed compression types are:

- DXT1 for opaque, non alpha layered images only (no transparency).
- DXT1a for 1 bit alpha layered images. (alpha has only black masking, not shades 
of grey; simply: parts of the image have full transparency or are completely opaque).
- DXT3 for semi-transparent images where the transparent layer values are distinct 
(if the alpha is the same shade across the image, or only varies in chunks).
- DXT5 for transparent or semi-transparent images (that are translucent and if the 
translucence varies a lot but not distinctly).

Further clarification: DXT1 is used when the image has no transparent parts at all. 

> DXT1a (DXT1 with alpha channel) is used when the images alpha layer is just 1 value. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DXT1a (DXT1 with alpha channel) is used when the image's alpha layer is just 1 value. 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

It's either on or off. If it's off, we should remove the alpha layer from the master 
and compress with regular DXT1. DXT3 is used if the image has an alpha layer with 
values other than 0 and 100% but they are not close together. DXT5 takes the same 
amount of space but it interpolates the alpha layer, for smooth
transitions between values.

Mipmaps
*******
It is recommended to create the following images without mipmaps (sequences of 
pre-calculated, optimized images that accompany a main texture) as they do not
need to be scaled down in the game:

- HUD images (cockpit, shield, armor, ships, gauges, ...)
- Main menu images
- Cargo images
- Interface images
- Space backgrounds

> While this image types require mipmaps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While these image types require mipmaps:
```

Reviewer 2: This grammar error, and the others like it, do not appear to have been fixed yet.

Do you understand the issue here? It's a mismatch between singular and plural.

Not a huge deal, but it would be nice to get these fixed.

Reviewer 2: This one is fixed too. Thanks!

- Unit textures
- Cockpit mesh textures
- Animation images
- Planet textures

In case of doubt please ask one of the developers or on the forum.

Compression for production
**************************

> Historically the maintainers used *nvcompress* tool for compressing 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Historically, the maintainers used the *nvcompress* tool for compressing 
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not going to block on this one. These are minor suggestions.

Reviewer 2: Good enough. Thanks!

textures to dds format. While a few years have passed since the last update 

> of this page, the tools seems to still be around - good for us!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of this page, the tools seem to still be around - good for us!
```

or

```suggestion
of this page, the tool seems to still be around - good for us!
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed! 👍🏽

> This is the link between this reposository and the `production repository 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the link between this repository and the `production repository 
```

Reviewer 2: This does not appear to have been fixed.

Reviewer 2: It's fixed now! Excellent.

textures used in the game in a mirrored folder structure.

Please note that nvcompress (all versions) is invisibly
corrupting DXT5 compressed textures for older nVidia graphic
cards principally with drivers before version 169.09. Please
update to the latest drivers for testing dds textures.

You will need nVidia's free texture tool nvcompress to
transform your original textures to optimized dds textures. Get
the tool here: `NVIDIA Texture Tools 
<http://developer.nvidia.com/object/texture_tools.html>`_

Transform your original texture using nvcompress using one of
the recommended DXT1, DXT1a, DXT3, or DXT5 formats including or
excluding mipmaps (option -nomips).

For DXT1 (opaque) images:

``nvcompress -bc1 (-nomips) texture_original.png texture_dds.texture``

For DXT1a images with transparency:

``nvcompress -bc1 -rgb (-nomips) texture_original.png texture_dds.image``

For DXT3 images with transparency:

``nvcompress -bc2 (-nomips) texture_original.png texture_dds.image``

For DXT5 images with smooth transparency gradient:

``nvcompress -bc3 (-nomips) texture_original.png texture_dds.image``

*Compression with Gimp dds plugin*

> Gimp plugin produces dds images with lower quality than that one produced by 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gimp plugin produces dds images with lower quality than those produced by 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed, but not quite right. Now it says `hose` instead of `those`.

the nvcompress tool. In addition, the plugin uses hardware compression and 
may produce different results on different systems. Therefore, compressing 
images with this plugin is not recommended for submission, but can be used as an
alternative method for local testing purposes only.

*Validation and Testing*

Verify the optimized texture either by opening it with GIMP (with gimp-dds 
plugin installed) and making sure that all mipmap layers (e.g. 12 layers 
for 2048x2048 original image resolution) are contained in the file, or by 
checking it with:

``nvddsinfo texture_dds.texture``

It is strongly recommended to actually test the texture or image in game 
before submitting.

Image Naming (Extension)
************************

Until version 0.5.0 there were codec extensions being used for graphic files 
(**png**, **jpg**, or **bmp**). Unfortunately they have become totally mixed 
up and with the transition to DDS compressed files we have decided to move 
the extensions to codec-independent naming. The reason for having 2 different
extensions was to help artists stick to the requirements by making them aware 
that there is a difference between those 2 extensions. Please note that 

> extensions are coded in some cases so arbitrary interchange might break your graphics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extensions are hard-coded in some cases (for specific existing files?), so arbitrary interchange might break the game's graphics.
```

The following generic, codec independent extensions will be used for graphic files:

- **.image** - for mipmap-less 2d images (backgrounds, ui, cargo, bases, hud images 
and gauges, comm animations, splash screens, ...)
- **.texture** - for textures (unit textures, planet and sun textures, planet rings, 
sun flares, explosions, blinking lights, warp animations, engine trails, nebulae, ...)

The difference between .image and .texture is **only** in the *presence* of mipmaps in 

> *.texture* files and *absence* mipmaps in *.image* files. There is no relation 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*.texture* files and *absence* of mipmaps in *.image* files. There is no relation 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thank you!

> whatsoever to directories but depends only on how the graphics is being used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whatsoever to directories but depends only on how the graphics are being used.
```

or

```suggestion
whatsoever to directories but depends only on how the graphics file is being used.
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Cool 👍🏽

The animation directory has subdirectories that have either 2d images or 3d textures. 
The correct naming has to be evaluated for each new file.

Artistic Image Quality
**********************

Committed textures are classified as:

- DQ - Development Quality: textures with very low horizontal resolution and 
low degree of artistic quality
- RQ - Release Quality: textures with at least medium horizontal resolution and 
medium to high degree of artistic quality
- CQ - Cinematographic Quality: textures with high horizontal resolution and 
very high degree of artistic quality

Specific resolution requirements can be found on the development pages specific to 
each image type.

Git Repository Structure
------------------------

There are two repositories for graphics data which are linked together:

- *Assets-Production* (formerly *data*) which holds the compressed/optimized dds images

> - *Asset-Masters* (formerly *masters*) which holds the original (png) hi-resolution image

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- *Assets-Masters* (formerly *masters*) which holds the original (png) hi-resolution image
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

masters plus optionally the source/project files that were used to create the 

> compressed images. No other files will be kept in masters (text, data, sprite files, ...).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
compressed images. No other, unrelated files will be kept in Assets-Masters (text, data, sprite files, ...).
```

Note: Is this still the case?

Reviewer 2: This does not appear to be the case any longer. Assets-Masters now holds many files that are not directly related to images or textures. We probably need to change the text here, but I would be fine with doing that in a followup PR if need be.

Reviewer 2: The editorial changes I requested have been applied. Filed #95 to revisit the accuracy of this statement. Looks good for now!

Further, the following rules apply to **Asset-Masters (aka this repository)**:

- only original uncompressed images go here
- they must be placed in the same (relative) directory as in the compressed images 

> in *data*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in *Assets-Production*
```

Reviewer 2: Looks like this is fixed. Thanks!

> - the original images must have the same name as those in *data*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the original images must have the same name as those in *Assets-Production*
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed. Thanks!

in ``sprites/planets/earth/earth_texture.png``, the source file should be in 
``sprites/planets/earth/sources/earth_texture.xcf``. This is to keep the source files 
organized and easily identifiable as related to the original image. The source files 
must have the same name as the original.

The following naming convention applies for source files:

- instructions file naming: ``imagefile_instructions.txt``
- copyright/copyleft information should go into: ``imagefile_license.txt``
- source/project file naming: *Source images should be* ``imagefile_source.xcf`` 
    *(or whatever extension)*

The Selection and Vetting Process
---------------------------------

When submitting new art, it is recommended to request feedback from the community 
through the forum before submitting the images or textures.

The following steps are only required when you are **replacing existing art** which 
is already of exceptionally high (cinematographic) quality. If the image/texture 
that you have created meets the texture requirements, then:

- Open a poll for a reasonable period of time (e.g. 1-2 weeks) and describe:

>     - which image(s)/texture(s) you'd like to replace display your candidates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - which image(s)/texture(s) you'd like to replace; display your candidates
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed 👍🏽

    - briefly describe the method of creation and tools used
    - If you'd like to replace more than one image/texture, describe how you would 
assign the favorites of the poll to the individual images/textures

- After a set period of time
    - announce the winners
    - and call the poll closed

For both, submitting **replacement of existing art** or **adding missing art** 
(provided the new images/textures are not way off-topic):

> **Once there is a winer, submit a PR with the textures in this repository 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Once there is a winner, submit a PR with the textures in this repository 
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed
